layout: post
tite: Botulism Exposure

Are you familiar with botulism? Botulism is a food poison also know as Clostridium Botulinum. It is a toxin that can cause paralysis and death through respiratory failure. Now that there is some context behind botulism. I bet you are wondering what is the most common type and how many cases has there been over the years. Also, what are the ways to contract the toxin? Thanks to the CDC Botulism Consultation Service, Alaska Division of Public Health, and the California Department of non-infant botulism and infant botulism clinical data we can explore those questions. This data was collected over a 120 year study.
These clinical facilities were able to track confirmed cases. The confirmed cases consist of three different ways it can be contracted. As Fig.B1 shows below infants has a higher risk of being exposed to the toxin. It is more common for babies between 3 weeks and 6 months old to be affected by this illness. They are still at risk until 1 year of age. The Clostridium botulinum bacteria found in dirt and dust can contaminate honey. This is why it is cautioned against giving children under 1 honey. So parents, be mindful.
The next stop on this exposure train is food borne. This is also known as food poisoning. It can come from improper home canned or preserved foods. These include low acid vegetables and fermented fish. Exposure can also happen from commercially canned foods. Along with herb-infused oils, baking potatoes with aluminum foil, cheese sauce, and bottled garlic. Refer to fig.b2 for a deeper insight of the category of botulinum types and the exposure method.

Fig.B1
Certain categories are a more common case than others. Various categories have the same method of exposure. Fig.B2

Fig.B2 Exposure Type & Toxin Type

Fig.B3 Total of Toxin Types Reported
Just like all things must come to an end, so shall this. Over the years exposure rates has increased. Some categories more than others. The data provided is a representation of years of continuous studying and data gathering. Botulism is a serious illness that continuous to affect the population today. Toxin Type A-B is represented numerically as 1.0 in the figure below. The data has shown that this is the strain of the toxin that is most common and is still on the rise as of 2020.

Fig.B4 Toxin Type Exposure Count & Years Exposed
As consumers be aware that these toxins can be found in canned goods, home made and commercial. Honey is not advised for children under the age of 1 because of the risk of botulism. The most cases reported were food borne and infants over a 120 year period. Here is a helpful resource to guide you https://www.foodsafety.gov/food-poisoning/bacteria-and-viruses#botulism.


